# Languages and Organization
The web is programming language *agnostic*.  The web runs on open protocols - mostly plain text being transmitted back and forth between web browsers (and other clients) and web servers.  Clients and servers can programmatically generate their requests and responses using any language they want - as long as the text they are producing conforms to web standards.

You might be surprised, or even a little confused by this - especially if you've only just started studying Computer Science and the web.  You've heard of HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and probably also heard people talking about Java, C#/ASP.NET, Python, Go, Rust, and a whole slew of other languages when they talk about web development.  It can be absolutely befuddling... where do you start?  If there isn't just one language, then which should you learn?

The other hard part about getting started with web development is that it's really hard to draw boundaries around it.  Does web development include working with a database?  Does it include UI design?  How about distributed computing?  What about queues?  The answer is... yes - it probably includes everything!  The reality is that a *web application* is a system - and depending on what it does, it could contain functionality associated with just about every branch of computer science.  A typical web developer has to (or should be prepared to) integrate a lot of different sub-disciplines. In fact, the bulk of the complexity in many web applications *have nothing to do with web development at all!*.

In this book, we are going to try really hard to stick to purely *web development*, but not to the extent that you won't understand the integration points to things like UI design, databases, networks, etc.  

I strongly believe there shouldn't be a distinction between *web developer* and *software developer*, and this book is written for reader who agree.

## JavaScript, everywhere?
This book uses JavaScript as a server side language, running within the Node.js runtime environment.  This choice is somewhat controversial - since there are wonderful frameworks and support for many programming languages on the backend.  No question, the use of .NET ASP MVC, Python, Java, Rust, Ruby on Rails, Go and many others could be more than justified.  The truth is that you can find just about any programming language being used professionally on the backend - and many applications use a mix of languages!

I have chosen JavaScript for no reason other than this:  *If you are new to web development*, you **must** learn JavaScript for client-side browser-based development.  Learning multiple programming languages at the same time obscures concepts - and concepts are what this book is about.  In teaching web development to undergraduate university students for over a dozen years, I’ve found that using JavaScript limits the overhead in learning web topics.  If you already know the JavaScript language, this book will give you a tour-de-force in web development concepts - without needing to learn a new language.  If you *are* new to JavaScript, this book should give you enough of a primer while teaching you the backend such that by the time we cover client side programming, you’ll be able to focus on concepts and not syntax.  Once you learn the concepts of web development, you won’t have trouble moving to other languages on the backend if you prefer.

There are other arguments made for JavaScript on the backend, such as sharing code between server and front end runtimes, and the suitability of JavaScript’s I/O model for backend web development.  These arguments have some validity, but they aren’t universally agreed to by any stretch.  We use JavaScript here for no other reason but to flatten the **learning curve**.

On the front end, there are of course other paradigms beyond JavaScript.  There is no question that JavaScript has some rough edges, and until very recently lacked many language features that supprot solid application development.  Still at the time of this writing (and well beyond I imagine!), JavaScript is not a strongly typed or compiled language - and those attributes alone rub some the wrong way. [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) is a widely popular derivation of JavaScript, adding many features such as strong typing and better tooling to JavaScript.  Like many of it's descendents (or inspirations), such as [CoffeeScript](https://coffeescript.org/), TypeScript *compiles* to plain old JavaScript, so it can be effectively used to write both backend and front end applications.

[WebAssembly](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) continues to grow in popularity and promise, allowing developers to run many different languages within the browser.  At the time of writing, WebAssembly supports executing C/C++, Rust, Java, Go, and several other performant languages directly within the browser - bringing near native performance to front end code.  The caveat, for the time being, is that WebAssembly code executes this code in a sandboxed environment that does *not* have access to the brower's document object model (DOM) - meaning interacting seamlessly with the rendered HTML is not yet acheivable.

This book will only touch on the above alternatives for front end development, sticking with plain old JavaScript instead.  Once again, this decision is rooted in the *learning curve*.  The aim of the book is to teach you how web development works, and whether you are writing JavaScript, TypeScript, or WASM-enabled C++/Java/Rust/etc - front end development is still front end development - so we are going to stick with the most straightforward choice - JavaScript here.

## Organization
This book teaches web development almost in the order in which things developed - first focusing on networks, hypertext, markup and server side rendering.  You will be introduced to JavaScript early on when, just before we begin processing input from users.  We will build frameworks around HTML templating, databases, routing, and other common backend tasks - only to have our homegrown implementations replaces with Express.  The Express framework was chosen for its relative stability and ubiquity, among the many frameworks in use within the Node.js ecosystem.

Only after we have a full web application up and running do we begin to turn our attention towards styling and interactivity.  CSS is introduced approximately midway through the text book, and client side JavaScript makes up the majority of the final half dozen chapters.  This book will show you the differences between traditional web applications, single page applications, and cover hybrid approaches that adhere to **H**ypertext **a**s **t**he **e**ngine **o**f **a**pplication **s**tate (HATEOAS) philosophy, while still providing interactive (and incrementally/partially rendered) user interfaces.  Along the way, we will cover things like local storage, PWAs, web sockets, and reactivity.

The Appendices and Perspectives sections at the end of the text are optional components aimed towards filling in some of the details different readers may be wondering about.  The goal of the entire textbook, in fact, is to do this that - **fill in the gaps** - by providing a comprehensive overview of web development.  
