# Hypertext
We all know what *text* is.  It's not a stretch from *text* to the concept of a *text document* - we're all pretty familiar with that idea too.  One thing about text documents (think about paper documents) is that they often *refer* to other documents.  These references might be footnotes, citations, bibliographies, or just embedded as quotations in the text.  

*Hyper*, in mathematics, means *extension*.  The concept of somehow *extending* text documents such that you could instantaneously reach things such as references was inspired by pre-computer technologies like microfilm.  The term *hyper-text* first appeared in an article written by Vannevar Bush in 1945, in which a futuristic device called the *Memex* allowed a user to instantly skip and link to content made of chains of microfilm frames.  In the 1960's, this concept was closer to reality through digital document systems.  Ted Nelson coined the terms *HyperText* along with *HyperMedia* (referering to a systems where not just text could be linked and skipped to, but also images, sound, and video).  

The concept of having links within documents *that could be travelled* instantaneously is a powerful one.  It's not just that a reader can quickly skip to different documents (and then return to the original), but documents could *embed* other documents and media from different sources.  If you consider pre-digital information systems (i.e. books, card catalogs, and libraries), you can see how much of a leap this is.

There is a lot more history to hypertext.  You are encouraged to do some [research](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext), but let's move on to how hypertext moved from an emerging idea to the technology that we use every single day.

While working at [CERN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERN) in 1989, Tim Berners-Lee proposed a project to link text documents already on the internet together, called the [WorldWideWeb](https://www.w3.org/Proposal.html).  The core of the proposal was a *protocol* for **addressing** documents, **requesting** documents over TCP, and **delivering** documents.  Crucially, within these documents was a way to embed addresses of other documents. This allowed the software *rendering* the document to allow a user to ask it to display that resource.  We of course recognize this as a *link*.  We use them every day :)

If you haven't put it together yet, the [WorldWideWeb](https://www.w3.org/Proposal.html) project is where we got the `www` from, and documents that were available on this system were written in an early version of **HTML** - which stands for **H**per **T**ext **M**arkup **L**anguage.  The "software" that *rendered* these documents was the first **web browser**.  Some of the very first web browsers were text based, the [Line Mode Browser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_Mode_Browser) and [Lynx](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynx_(web_browser)) are some of the most influencial.  Berners-Lee is also credit with creating the first web server at CERN, to serve the documents to the first browsers.

## HTTP Protocol
The glue between the browser and the server is **the protocol** that they use to address, request, and deliver documents (which are more accurately called *resources*, since they need not be text).  The **protocol** is the **H**yper**T**ext **T**ransfer **P**rotocol.  Just like the "echo" protocol we saw in the last chapter, it's just a text-based protocol. Text is is sent from the client (the web browser), intepreted by the server, and text is sent as a response.  The difference is that the text is much more **structured**, such that it can include metadata about the resources being requested and delivered, along with data and resources themselves.

The HTTP protocol has proven to be a remarkably powerful method of exchanging data on networks.  It is fairly simplistic, but is efficient and flexible.  At it's heart is the concept of **resources**, which are addressable (we'll see this referred to as a *URL* - [universal resource locator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL)).  If we think of HTTP as a language, then resources are the *nouns* - they are the things we do things with.  The **verbs** of HTTP are the things we do - the *requests* web browsers (clients) perform on resources.  The *adjectives* are meta data that we use to descrive both nouns and verbs - we'll soon recognize these as *request* and *response* headers.